Historical string power level clarification (#3688)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: content/server-server-api.md

#### Definitions

> ##### Required Power Level

Reviewer: These shouldn't be promoted to headings - the bolding is fine

A given event type has an associated *required power level*. This is
given by the current `m.room.power_levels` event. The event type is
either listed explicitly in the `events` section or given by either
`state_default` or `events_default` depending on if the event is a state
event or not.

##### Invite Level, Kick Level, Ban Level, Redact Level

The levels given by the `invite`, `kick`, `ban`, and `redact` properties
in the current `m.room.power_levels` state. Each defaults to 50 if
unspecified.

##### Target User

For an `m.room.member` state event, the user given by the `state_key` of
the event.

> ##### Historical String Power Levels

Reviewer: @jplatte says:

> Is anybody aware of real-world v6+ rooms that have bigint string power-levels? I can see that breaking existing rooms with string power levels in general is a no-go, but breaking existing rooms with bigint string power levels seems pretty reasonable to me.

Reviewer: @turt2live says:
> Real world or not, it's unsafe to consider some room versions affected and others not, unfortunately.

Reviewer: @jplatte says:
> I don't understand. What do you mean by "unsafe"?

Reviewer: Unsafe as in we can no longer assume we have reasonable visibility on the whole federation, therefore making the assumption become one where we break something no matter what we do. What we break is largely the point of contention though.

Reviewer 2: this thread seems to be a duplicate of https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3688#discussion_r796632174.

Reviewer 3: I suggest we break rooms with PLs outside the range in v6+ and add an appropriate error message to synapse that says to report a bug, if an existing room is broken because of that. And then when someone comes and actually complains about it, we can discuss relaxing the limit as well. We don't need to allow all synapse currently allows, just what is already in the wild. And those are from my search only PLs inside the range, but as strings, in v6+. As long as it is clear how to report, if someone finds a non-conforming room, I think it is fine to break those temporarily.

Reviewer: (this thread moved)

Power level events in room versions up to and including room version 9

> can be optionally represented in string format, in order to maintain

Reviewer 4: I don't know if it is worth mentioning but.... room versions 1 to 5 inclusive can unfortunately have float power-levels that get cast to `int` as well in Synapse. See [MSC2540](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2540).

Again from the [Python docs](https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#int):

> For floating point numbers, this truncates towards zero.

😢

> Power level events in room versions up to and including room version 9
> can be optionally represented in string format, in order to maintain
> compatibility with pre-1.0 implementations without breaking existing rooms.
> A homeserver must be prepared to deal with this by parsing the power level
> from the string. In these cases, the following formatting of the power level
> string is allowed:

Reviewer: We'll define a range when we pull this out of the s2s spec in favour of the room version specs (this section will get airlifted out of this doc).

For now, the following (or a variation therein) should be fine:
```suggestion
In order to maintain backwards compatibility with early implementations,
power levels can optionally be represented in string format instead of
integer format. A homeserver must be prepared to deal with this by parsing 
the power level from a string. In these cases, the following formatting of the 
power level string is allowed:
```

Reviewer: something missing from this paragraph is a pointer to what value we're talking about though. Examples after the grammar would probably be best, demonstrating a scenario or two (`kick` power level being `"12"` and a user having PL `"42"` or something similar).

> - a single Base10 integer — no float values or decimal points;

Reviewer 5: This must also have "optionally with leading `0` characters", even if this is also included in the "base10 integer" part, for explicitness.

Author: I have updated to:
```
- a single Base10 integer, no float values or decimal points, optionally with leading zeroes;
```

> - a single Base10 integer, no float values or decimal points, optionally with leading zeroes;

Reviewer 5: One thing i need to ask, and mention, is what the range of this integer will be.

Synapse does not correctly validate a string-passed integer, allowing it to become bigger than 64-bit, or the canonical JSON 2^53 limit.

I personally think this latter bit should not be included, and integers should be validated according to the canonical JSON limit, but it is still worth mentioning.

Reviewer: Limits are difficult because this dates all the way back to python2 which had a firm limit, but the bug has persisted through a python3 transition where no practical limits are applied. 

This is way out of my depth as a reviewer, so will defer to the server-side folk of the SCT for comment.

Reviewer 6: requiring bigints would significantly complicate server implementations, as in many languages using them isn't as simple as in python.

Reviewer 3: I would not lax the limit on the integers. Our database adventures found not a single event outside the range. So it should be safe to not also relax the limit on the integer range. If it actually breaks rooms, we could add such language to the spec then?

Reviewer 2: > I would not relax the limit on the integers. 

+1. This whole thing is a balance between not breaking too many existing rooms, whilst not making supporting those existing rooms too onerous for non-Synapse implementations.

Given that we don't know of any rooms which have stringy PLs outside `[-2^53, 2^53)`, requiring non-synapse implementations to support such PLs seems an unnecessary burden.

Reviewer: @deepbluev7 says:

> I suggest we break rooms with PLs outside the range in v6+ and add an appropriate error message to synapse that says to report a bug, if an existing room is broken because of that. And then when someone comes and actually complains about it, we can discuss relaxing the limit as well. We don't need to allow all synapse currently allows, just what is already in the wild. And those are from my search only PLs inside the range, but as strings, in v6+. As long as it is clear how to report, if someone finds a non-conforming room, I think it is fine to break those temporarily.

Reviewer 2: (in other words, let's change synapse to reject such PL events if it sees them in the future)

Reviewer 4: > Limits are difficult because this dates all the way back to python2 which had a firm limit, but the bug has persisted through a python3 transition where no practical limits are applied.

I don't think this is accurate. I just did some testing on Python 2:

```pycon
>>> int("12345689012345678901234567890")
12345689012345678901234567890L
>>> type(_)
<type 'long'>
```

On python 3 this creates:

```pycon
>>> int("12345689012345678901234567890")
12345689012345678901234567890
>>> type(_)
<class 'int'>
```

The difference is that Python 2 had a separate `long` class while Python 3 has an `int` class which expands to any size (essentially `long` from Python 2). `json.dumps` seems to work fine (and creates invalid JSON going over the 2 ^ 53 limit... for a number)

- optionally with leading or trailing whitespace characters;

> - optionally prefixed with a single `-` or `+` character.

Reviewer 7: Reading this, I'm left with a small uncertainty: *what* is allowed to have leading whitespace characters? The integer, the entire string, or both?

In other words, is this allowed?

```
+ 5
^^^
```

Or even

```
  + 5
^^^^^
```

Judging by the behaviour of Python's `int`, the intended interpretation is that only the entire string is allowed to have leading/trailing spaces. In this case, I'd probably swap the order of those sentences.

Reviewer 5: The above is not;

```
>>> int("+ 5")
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
ValueError: invalid literal for int() with base 10: '+ 5'

```

Author: I have updated to:
```
- optionally prefixed with a single `-` or `+` character before the integer but after padding.
```

Reviewer 7: @ShadowJonathan: I know it's not allowed by Python (I state as much in my comment), just noticing that the wording allows for that interpretation making it a bit ambiguous :)

> - optionally prefixed with a single `-` or `+` character before the integer but after padding.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- optionally prefixed with a single `-` or `+` character before the integer but after leading whitespace padding.
```

> This behaviour is preserved strictly for backward compatibility only. A
> homeserver should take reasonable precautions to prevent users from
> uploading new power level events with string values and must never
> populate the default power levels in a room as string values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% boxes/warning %}}
This behaviour is preserved strictly for backward compatibility only. A
homeserver should take reasonable precautions to prevent users from
sending new power level events with string values and must never
populate the default power levels in a room as string values.
{{% /boxes/warning %}}
```
